So now, let's talk about how does
React do, what it does, right?
Because it's really hard to triage and
think about what could be the cause of
the issue if you're like something
in virtual DOM, life is good, right?
And so
let's talk about when something changes,
what exactly goes on under the hood?
So React's rendering cycle
has effectively three phases.
And I think we mostly know about them,
right?
And so we have the render phase.
I think that the whole,
it's not necessarily true.
There is a virtual dom, and
that was definitely true in 2013.
It is increasingly less
true at this point.
But the process still, and we'll see this
in another slide to see actually how
it plays out,
which is the rendering phase.
Our components at the end of the day
are a bunch of functions, or possibly,
JavaScript classes.
And so when something changes,
cuz once we render the page,
if the user never clicks on a single thing
ever, you don't have performance issues.
They took some kind of action,
or you're polling for
the API every 30 seconds, something
has to happen to trigger rerender.
React does not choose to rerender on
its own, something occurred either
through your code, or most likely
cuz the user did a thing, right?
They tend to do that on applications,
right?
And if they never do a thing ever,
I wonder why this is a React app and
not either a, a server side rendered app,
or b, just an HTML page.
Those are super performance, right?
You wanna solve your React
performance problems,
that's the way to do it right there.
So when something changes,
we go through the render phase,
which is it invokes all the classes,
it calls all the functions,
it looks at the output, and goes,
what's different from last time, right?
And it gathers up all of those things.
And then with the array of things,
array is probably an overloaded word.
With the list of things that have
changed since the last time it rendered,
it goes and figures out what
the most heuristic set of changes.
Post performance data changes to the DOM
are to make and it makes us, right?
It is one of those things where,
yes, if you were gonna sit there and
handcraft every change on the page,
you can probably beat React.
But as a general heuristic,
it has a set of rules that it applies, or
what the right thing is to do
most of the time, and it works.
And that's when it enters the commit
phase, it takes this list of changes it
needs to make to the DOM, and
it does them, it updates the DOM, right?
And if you ever use a ref in React,
it also needs to then update those refs,
right?
Refs are basically references
to exact DOM nodes.
If it has changed the DOM, it does need
to do one more sweep to make sure like,
are all those refs still pointing
to objects that exist and
wiring them all back up?
And then we have the clean up phase.
Implicitly, in between commit and clean
up, there is this passive effects phase.
That's where stuff like
use effect happens, right?
And as we know, a use effect could call
a set state, and we're back, right?
And that's why the dependency list matters
and stuff along those lines, Mark.
>> Where do animations happen, and
how does that affect rendering?
>> Animations depend, right?
If it is an animation,
that is done through CSS, right?
Then those actually will a lot of
times not happen on the main thread.
If you are on the other hand taking a DOM
node and changing a value on it, those
are synchronous, and they happen during a
lot of times you'll be modifying the DOM.
It'll either happen to
a series of renders.
It really depends,
if you're doing it on ref,
then it will happen in the commit phase.
If you're doing it by changing the state
every second, you're just gonna go on this
Ferris wheel, is spinning very
fast through this entire process.
But if it's a CSS class, then it will
happen on a different process altogether.
Cool?
All right, so let's look at this render
phase and how it actually works.
Basically, the kind of high level is we've
got this idea of something happened.
Usually, almost always,
that is some kind of state change.
It's either a state change or
a prop change, but
what's changed in something's props.
Eventually, there was a state
change somewhere, right?
The context could change,
but a lot of times,
there's a use state hiding
in that context, right?
And as I've talked about before and
we will talk about later,
use state is just an abstraction
over use reducer.
So if it happens in use state,
then it happens in use reducer.
So we start out with our state change,
that triggers a render.
And then the heuristic that React uses for
whether it should
render a child component is,
did the parent change, right?
There's no like, let me guess,
there's no other heuristic of
the state change will trigger
on some parent node, right?
And then all of its children will
be asked to rerender, right?
And then at the end of that render phase,
React will gather them all up before them
the guy who is different now, right?
But every single one regardless.
>> There's a question around,
do these changes batch if
there's two separate components?
>> I love questions
that I have slides for.
I will answer now, then I'll answer it
again because I'm not gonna be rude and
not answer now.
So the question was, what happens
if we took a two state changes,
three, five, ten at the same time?
And do I go through this
rigmarole x number of times?
And that question somewhat depends on
what version of React you are using.
If you're using React 17 and earlier,
which is a very real possibility for
a lot of people.
React 18 has not been out that long, and
sometimes trying to get that upgrade
prioritized on the old list isn't
the easiest thing to do in the world.
There's no shame about that.
So in React 17 and earlier,
sometimes they were batched,
they were batched in an event handler,
right?
So in and on change, in and
on submit, they were batched.
There's a giant asterisk and seven other
disclaimers on that only in that function.
If that event handler had a set timeout,
or
I don't know, a promise and
an async function,
no longer were they batched, right?
So in a very small subset of cases,
they were batched in React 17 and earlier.
In React 18 and later, which I guess
is just React 18 and whatever.
Minor version's on at this point,
you get automatic batch.
And now,
they are batched across the board.
In React 18, they will basically
run through the code or
collect up all of the state changes.
And then when it's got through that
entire process, then it will go and
do the next round of state changes.
So the answer is it depends.
It depends on whether you're using 18 or
17.
If you're using 18, yes,
if you're using 17, it depends,
right, in a probably the most common case,
yeah, right?
But also awaiting promises is
relatively common as well.
Yeah, the heuristic is a state change
can happen anywhere in the tree,
and at that point,
it tells all of its children to rerender.
Now, really, this graph is 90%
of what we're focusing on today.
So there's a bunch of strategies here.
One, right now, it's happening at
the top of this very simple tree.
If you moved it down to one of those,
that second row, right, whatever,
if you can make that state change happen
lower, fewer things have to rerender.
It doesn't make everything rerender
whenever something happens,
it says from the point that
the state change on down, right?
So the further you can push
down that state change,
which is sometimes antithetical to what
we're told when we first learning React.
It's like you lift everything up and
you pass everything down, but
don't lift it too high is what
this chart is saying, right?
You lift it too high, you're gonna
trigger a lot of rerenders and
stuff along those lines.
So pushing it down as much as possible,
right, is the first and best, and arguably
not always attainable, but step one, the
first thing that you should try, right?
There's a step two,
which is kind of equally as good, but
we'll talk about that one in a second.
Then if that one doesn't work and
the tree is worthy of this,
then it is worth saying,
somewhere in the middle.
Can one of you step in and see if
this really needs to continue, right,
just cuz that one up there started it.
For me and my family,
nothing's changed for us.
Especially, let's imagine this one down,
okay, we have a node that ends,
right, right there.
Memorizing that one, pointless.
The act of doing it is not cuz we render.
But let's say on the right
side of the screen,
that goes down 47 more levels.
Stopping that at level two or
three is probably worth it, right?
Again, React does not try to
figure it out, it does not care,
it's just gonna go, right.
So where the cost benefit for any of these
techniques come to is how expensive if
we kept going down this path at the place
that we could have stopped it, right?
How expensive would have been?
And it isn't worth it, and that's
the point where like, yeah, at that point.
You've done the cost-benefit analysis,
it makes total sense.
But doing it on a trade that's about to
end, probably not even worth it, right?
Even if it's worth re-rendering,
okay, it's fine, relax.
But yeah, they trigger down,
they keep going down.
So part of it is to push that state
change down as far as you possibly can.
And the second one is to stop it,
if you can.
>> If I recall correctly at some
point in Reddit, there was something,
like if props didn't really change,
the component won't rerender.
>> Yep.
>> So that does not necessarily fit.
And I remember I was confused when
profiling myself why it wasn't
holding true, would you describe how true?
But I clearly remember until,
as soon as props remain the same,
the child will not rerender,
how does that fit here?
>> Yeah, so there's a bunch of ways,
one of it we'll do today.
So in class based components,
it was should component update, right?
That was a method that you
can put in a class one, and
that method got two arguments,
old props and new props, right?
And you could theoretically look at them,
right?
That was a manual way, and
we're doing manually with hooks.
I believe you could have a class
that inherited from pure component.
And pure component was
basically a subclass
of component that had a should
component update that said,
just do even a triple equal sign
on these two things, right?
Or just shallowly compare them,
and then it would stop it.
And I believe for the functional
components, there was maybe React or
functional component, or
maybe it was a pure component version.
But yeah, there was a functional
component version as well that did
the very shallow should component
update out of the box, right?
The tricky part to that is, one of the
things you always have to think about with
performance is that if it was you
should always do this, right,
then they would have just built
it into the framework, right?
And so what happens is a lot of
those quality checks were completely
unnecessary, right?
Again, it is useful because failing one
of those should component updates or
react dot memo or one of the other ones
very high on a tree that has a great,
great, great to the 100th power
grandchild, totally worth it.
But also calling on every almost dead end,
right,
would slow your app down
more than it would help.
And so what happened was you'll use those
components just as by default, right?
Without thinking about it like, well,
that one's better cuz it checks, right?
And then all of a sudden, they're doing
a thousand of these memoization checks for
gains that were less than the cost
of doing the memoization check.
So those, I believe, they might even
still be in there, I don't know.
Sugar component obviously react at
memo which are the manual ones.
But yeah, there are ways to do it, but
I will still, even if they are still
in there, warn against them because
doing it everywhere all the time.
Now, I think there was a talk about
a year ago about someone working
on React kinda working on a heuristic
where they could actually
do it when necessary and
not do it when not necessary, right?
We've seen that sometimes, not doing
it all the time can be problematic.
That's our jobs today.
We've also seen from
the example we're pointing out,
doing it all the time no
matter what also problematic.
But if we could have a computer figure
out when to do it, when not to do, and
get it right 98% of the time, again,
the gains will probably outweigh
the 2% of the time that it calls
a memo when it shouldn't, right?
So that's kind of the name of the game.
So it's work on this,
and you think about it.
The question that came up
before about batching, right?
There was a little bit of
batching in certain cases, and
then there was automatic fashion and
it worked.
So it'd be interesting a year from now,
two years from now, the answer might be
like the heuristic has shift, right,
there's work being done on it.
But at this moment,
It falls under things that,
the tricky parts that are left on us with
the knowledge of our application, right?
In the same way, we start to put keys in
there cuz it's like React doesn't totally
know what makes that thing unique,
it just needs one piece of information
to know if it's roughly the same thing.
There's still a few things left on us
to do to kind of inform React about
what our intentions are.
And so that's where it comes out here,
but so you're using what,
if your component for the class-based
ones, but yeah class based ones.
But yeah, using those consistently
can be more problematic than not.
And so
I think an important thing to think about.
We won't spend too much time on this,
but this is kind of an overall, like,
how everything goes down, which is you
start out with a component mounting,
which is run the function,
call the class, right?
Figure out what that original output is,
that's the kind of purple section, right?
You'll get back some JSX, whether it's the
render method on a class based component,
or the output on a functional one.
And that will kind of be there.
And then cool, with the first one, you
don't even need to do any diffing, right?
It's like this thing doesn't exist,
go put it on the page right on.
And that's when it happens
in the commit phase.
And then after that, which is
sometimes why using use effect for
AJAX requests, network requests,
is somewhat problematic or
tricky because you wait until
you've done everything.
And then you're like let's go fetch
the data for this component, right?
And there's various tricks, I think
maybe the libraries like React query,
use SWR, and stuff along those lines.
Yeah, I think user WR will make
a ref that can cache between cycles.
It doesn't like trickery, right?
But yeah, the use effect will happen after
you've already committed to the DOM.
And then we'll clean up effects,
which might trigger some stuff.
Then like we said before, and that much,
much simpler version of this,
right, a use state or
use reducer will go ahead and
be the thing that the catalyst for
the updating phase, right?
We'll figure out what all the changes are,
we'll trigger that tree,
we'll update the DOM again, and the things
kinda continue and go forward like that.
But that is a simplified version
of the relatively involved process
of figuring everything out, but is like we
mount that first time, then what changed?
.Cool, the other interesting ones cuz
we will use them today is use memo,
gets set that very first time, and then
use call backs are kind of pulled in to
make sure we're not
redefining the function.
So if you've never used those hooks
before, we'll use a whole lot today,
don't worry, you will you ever use
them by the end, how about that?
That is the kind of situation we find
ourselves in that we are going to be able
to deal with.